General Instructions :
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them :
(i) This question paper contains 35 questions. All questions are compulsory.
(ii) This question paper is divided into five Sections	A, B, C, D and E.
(iii) In Section A	Questions no. 1 to 18 are Multiple Choice (MCQ) type questions, carrying 1 mark each.
(iv) In Section B	Questions no. 19 to 25 are Very Short Answer (VSA) type questions, carrying 2 marks each.
(v) In Section C	Questions no. 26 to 30 are Short Answer (SA) type questions, carrying 3 marks each.
(vi) In Section D	Questions no. 31 to 33 are Long Answer (LA) type questions carrying 5 marks each.
(vii) In Section E	Questions no. 34 and 35 are case-based questions carrying
4 marks each.
(viii) There is no overall choice. However, an internal choice has been provided in 2 questions in Section B, 2 questions in Section C, 3 questions in Section D and 2 questions in Section E.
(ix) Use of calculators is not allowed.
Use the following values of physical constants, if required :
c = 3	108 m/s
h = 6.63	10 34 Js
e = 1.6	10 19 C
0 = 4	10 7 T m A 1
0 = 8.854	10 12 C2 N 1 m 2
1	= 9	109 N m2 C 2
4	0
Mass of electron (me) = 9.1	10 31 kg
Mass of neutron = 1.675	10 27 kg
Mass of proton = 1.673	10 27 kg
6.023	1023 per gram mole
Boltzmann constant = 1.38	10 23 JK 1


1. 
axis, experiences a force on the charge will be :

SECTION A




(a)


F	(b)
16


F	(c)
8

	
F	(d)	F
4	2


2. For a metallic conductor, the correct representation of variation of resistance R with temperature T is :

(a) (b)	(c)	(d)
3. The potential difference across a cell in an open circuit is 8 V. It falls to 4 V when a current of 4 A is drawn from it. The internal resistance of the cell is :
(a) 4	(b)  3	(c)  2	(d) 1
4. A steady current flows through a metallic wire whose area of cross-section (A) increases continuously from one end of the wire to the other. The magnitude of drift velocity (vd) of the free electrons as a

(a) (b)	(c)	(d)
5. A diamagnetic substance is brought near the north or south pole of a bar magnet. It will be :
(a) repelled by both the poles.
(b) attracted by both the poles.
(c) repelled by the north pole and attracted by the south pole.
(d) attracted by the north pole and repelled by the south pole.

6. A circular coil of radius 8 0 cm and 40 turns is rotated about its vertical diameter with an angular speed of 25 rad s 1 in a uniform horizontal
magnetic field of magnitude 3 0	10 2 T. The maximum emf induced in the coil is :
(a) 0·12 V	(b)	0·15 V
(c)	0·19 V	(d)	0·22 V

7. Figure shows a rectangular conductor PSRQ in which movable arm PQ

of emf induced when PQ is moved with a velocity v  does not depend on :


(a)	magnetic field ( B )(b)velocity ( v )(c)	resistance (r)(d)length of PQ
8. In the process of charging of a capacitor, the current produced between the plates of the capacitor is :

(a)


(c)

d E	(b)
0  dt

d E	(d)
0  dt

 1  d E
0	dt

 1  d E

0	dt

where symbols have their usual meanings.

9.  f
the object and its real image is :
(a) zero	(b)	f
(c)	2f	(d)	4f

10. The	radius	of	the	nth	orbit	in	Bohr	model	of	hydrogen	atom	is proportional to :

(a)

1	(b)	1
n2	n

(c)	n2	(d)	n

11. Hydrogen atom initially in the ground state, absorbs a photon which excites it to n = 5 level. The wavelength of the photon is :
(a) 975 nm	(b)	740 nm
(c)	523 nm	(d)	95 nm

12. The mass density of a nucleus of mass number A is :

(a) proportional to
(b) proportional to

A1 / 3
A2 / 3

(c) proportional to A3
(d) independent of A

13. An ac source of voltage is connected in series with a p-n junction diode and a load resistor. The correct option for output voltage across load resistance will be :



14. When an intrinsic semiconductor is doped with a small amount of trivalent impurity, then :
(a) its resistance increases.
(b) it becomes a p-type semiconductor.
(c) there will be more free electrons than holes in the semiconductor.
(d) dopant atoms become donor atoms.

15. In the energy-band diagram of n-type Si, the gap between the bottom of the conduction band EC and the donor energy level ED is of the order of :
(a) 10 eV
(b) 1 eV
(c) 0 1 eV
(d) 0 01 eV


Questions number 16 to 18 are Assertion (A) and Reason (R) type questions. Two statements are given	one labelled Assertion (A) and the other labelled Reason
(R). Select the correct answer from the codes (a), (b), (c) and (d) as given below.
(a) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the correct explanation of the Assertion (A).
(b) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not
the correct explanation of the Assertion (A).
(c) Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false.
(d) Assertion (A) is false and Reason (R) is also false.


16. Assertion (A) : When a bar of copper is placed in an external magnetic field, the field lines get concentrated inside the bar.
Reason (R) :	Copper is a paramagnetic substance.

17. Assertion (A) : The phase difference between any two points on a wavefront is zero.
Reason (R) :  All points on a wavefront are at the same distance from the source and thus oscillate in the same phase.

18. Assertion (A) : Photoelectric effect demonstrates the particle nature of light.
Reason (R) :  Photoelectric current is proportional to intensity of incident radiation for frequencies more than the threshold frequency.

SECTION B

19. An alpha particle is projected with velocity v = (3·0 105 m/s) ^i into a region in which magnetic field B = [(0·4 T) ^i + (0·3 T) ^j ] exists. Calculate the acceleration of the particle in the region. ^i , ^j and ^k are
unit vectors along x, y and z axis respectively and charge to mass ratio
for alpha particle is 4·8	107 C/kg.	2
20. Consider an induced magnetic field due to changing electric field and an induced electric field due to changing magnetic field. Which one is more easily observed ? Justify your answer.	2

21. (a)

propagation	of	a	plane	wave	refracting	at	a	plane	surface separating two media.          2
OR

(b)	Why is a reflecting telescope preferred over a refracting telescope ? Justify your answer giving two reasons.	2

22. Two	coherent	monochromatic		light	beams		of	intensities	I	and	4 I superpose	each		other.	Find	the	ratio	of	maximum	and		minimum intensities in the resulting beam.													2
23. The ground state energy of hydrogen atom is	13 6 eV.	What is the potential energy and kinetic energy of an electron in the third excited state ?			2
24. (a)	Differentiate between intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors.	2
OR
(b)	Draw the circuit arrangement for studying the V	I characteristics of a p-n junction diode in forward bias and reverse bias. Show the
plot of V	I characteristic of a silicon diode.	2
25. Briefly explain how the diffusion and drift currents contribute to the formation of potential barrier in a p-n junction diode.	2
SECTION C
26. (a) Twelve negative charges of same magnitude are equally spaced and fixed on the circumference of a circle of radius R as shown in Fig. (i). Relative to potential being zero at infinity, find the electric potential and electric field at the centre C of the circle.
(b) If the charges are unequally spaced and fixed on an arc of 120 of radius R as shown in Fig. (ii), find electric potential at the centre C.   3



(i) (ii)

27. (a)	How does the resistance differ from impedance ? With the help of a suitable phasor diagram, obtain an expression for impedance of a series LCR circuit, connected to a source v = vm sin	t.	3
OR
(b)  Find the condition for resonance in a series LCR circuit connected to a source v = vm sin t, where can be varied. Give the factors on which the resonant frequency of a series LCR circuit depends. Plot
a graph showing the variation of electric current with frequency in
a series LCR circuit.	3
28. A long solenoid of radius r consists of n turns per unit length. A current I = I0 sin t flows in the solenoid. A coil of N turns is wound tightly around it near its centre. What is :
(a) the induced emf in the coil ?
(b) the mutual inductance between the solenoid and the coil ?	3
29. 
electrons from a metal surface ? Explain briefly. Plot the variation of photocurrent with :
(a) collector plate potential for different intensity of incident radiation, and
(b) intensity of incident radiation.	3
30. (a)	Draw the energy level diagram for hydrogen atom. Mark the transitions corresponding to the series lying in the ultraviolet region, visible region and infrared region.	3
OR
(b)	Draw a diagram to show the variation of binding energy per nucleon with mass number for different nuclei and mention its two features. Why do lighter nuclei usually undergo nuclear fusion ?	3

SECTION D
31. (a)	(i)
form, for two charges.
(ii) -square dependence on
di
(iii) Two charges A (charge q) and B (charge 2q) are located at points (0, 0) and (a, a) respectively. Let ^i and ^j be the unit
vectors along x-axis and y-axis respectively. Find the force exerted by A on B, in terms of ^i and ^j .	5
OR
(b) (i) Derive an expression for the electric field at a point on the equatorial plane of an electric dipole consisting of charges q and  q separated by a distance 2a.
(ii) The distance of a far off point on the equatorial plane of an electric dipole is halved. How will the electric field be affected for the dipole ?
(iii) Two identical electric dipoles are placed along the diagonals of
a square ABCD of side	m as shown in the figure. Obtain
the magnitude and direction of the net electric field at the centre (O) of the square.	5



32. (a)	(i)	State Biot-	
carrying element. Use this law to obtain an expression for the


current loop indicating the direction of magnetic field.

(ii)	An electron is revolving around the nucleus in a circular orbit
with a speed of 107 m s 1. If the radius of the orbit is 10 10 m, find the current constituted by the revolving electron in the
orbit.	5
OR
(b) (i) Derive an expression for the force acting on a current carrying straight conductor kept in a magnetic field. State the rule which is used to find the direction of this force. Give the condition  under  which  this  force  is  (1)  maximum,  and
(2) minimum.
(ii)  Two long parallel straight wires A and B are 2 5 cm apart in air. They carry 5 0 A and 2 5 A currents respectively in opposite directions. Calculate the magnitude of the force
exerted by wire A on a 10 cm length of wire B.	5


33. (a)	(i)	(1)	Write two points of difference between an interference pattern and a diffraction pattern.
(2)  Name any two factors on which the fringe width in a
-slit experiment depends.

(ii) In Y    -slit experiment, the two slits are separated by a distance equal to 100 times the wavelength of light that passes through the slits. Calculate :
(1) the angular separation in radians between the central maximum and the adjacent maximum.
(2) the distance between these two maxima on a screen
50 cm from the slits.	5
OR
(b)  (i)  A spherical surface of radius of curvature R separates two media of refractive indices n1 and n2. A point object is placed in front of the surface at distance u in medium of refractive
index n1 and its image is formed by the surface at distance v, in the medium of refractive index n2. Derive a relation between u and v.
(ii) A solid glass sphere of radius 6 0 cm has a small air bubble trapped at a distance 3 0 cm from its centre C as shown in the figure. The refractive index of the material of the sphere is 1 5. Find the apparent position of this bubble when seen through the surface of the sphere from an outside point E in
air.	5



SECTION E


34. The following figure shows a circuit diagram. We can find the currents through and potential differences across different resistors using Kirchhoff




Answer the following questions based on the above :
(a) Which points are at the same potential in the circuit ?	1
(b) What is the current through arm bg ?	1
(c) Find the potential difference across resistance R3.	2
OR
(c)	What is the power dissipated in resistance R2 ?	2

35. Strontium titanate is a rare oxide  a natural mineral found in Siberia. It is used as a substitute for diamond because its refractive index and critical angle are 2 41 and 24 5 , respectively, which are approximately equal to the refractive index and critical angle of diamond. It has all the properties of diamond. Even an expert jeweller is unable to differentiate between diamond and strontium titanate. A ray of light is incident normally on one face of an equilateral triangular prism ABC made of strontium titanate.




Answer the following questions based on the above :

(a) Trace the path of the ray showing its passage through the prism.	1

(b) Find the velocity of light through the prism.	1
(c) Briefly explain two applications of total internal reflection.	2
OR
(c)	Define total internal reflection of light. Give two conditions for it.	2




















































