
General Instructions :
Read the following instructions very carefully and follow them :
(i) This	question	paper	contains	35	questions.	All	questions	are compulsory.
(ii) Question paper is divided into FIVE sections -  Section A, B, C, D
andE.
(iii) In section -A: question number 1 to 18 are Multiple Choice (MCQ) type questions carrying 1 mark each.
(iv) In section - B: question number 19 to 25 are Short Answer-1 (SA-1) type questions carrying 2 marks each.
(v) In section - C: question number 26 to 30 are Short Answer-2 (SA-2) type questions carrying 3 marks each.
(vi) In section - D : question number 31 to 33 are Long Answer (LA) type questions carrying 5 marks each.
(vii) In section - E : question number 34 and 35 are case-based questions carrying 4 marks each.
(viii) There is no overall choice. However, an internal choice has been provided in 2 questions in Section - B, 2 questions in Section - C, 3 questions in Section - D and 2 questions in Section - E.
(ix) Use of calculators is NOT allowed.
c = 3 x 108 m/s
h = 6.63 x 10-34 Js
e = 1. 6 x 10-19 C
µ0 = 4n x 1o-7 T m A-1
Eo = 8.854 X 10-12 C2 N-1 m-2
-1- =9 x 109 N m2 c-2
41tE0
Mass of electron (m8) = 9.1 x 10-31 kg Mass of neutron= 1.675 x 10-27 kg Mass of proton= 1.673 x 10-27 kg
Avogadro's number= 6.023 x 1023 per gram mole Boltzmann constant= 1.38 x 10-23 JK-1



SECTION-A
1. An electric dipole of length 2 cm is placed at an angle of 30° with an electric field 2 x 105 NIC. If the dipole experiences a torque of 8 x 10-3 Nm,
the magnitude of either charge of the dipole, is	1
(A) 4 µC	(B)	7 µC
(C) 8 mC	(D)	2 mC
2. Two long parallel wires kept 2 m apart carry 3A current each, in the same direction. The force per unit length on one wire due to the other is	1
(A) 4.5 x 10-5 Nm-1, attractive	(B)	4.5 x 10-7 Nim, repulsive
(C)	9 x 10-7 Nim, repulsive	(D)	9 x 10-5 Nim, attractive
3. Which of the following has its permeability less than that of free space?	1
(A) Copper	(B)	Aluminium
(C)	Copper chloride	(D)	Nickel
4. A square	shaped	coil of	side	10 cm,	having	100	turns is placed perpendicular to a magnetic field which is increasing at 1 Tis. The induced emf in the coil is						1

(A) 0.1 V
(C)	0.75 V
(B) 
0.5 V
(D)	1.0 V

5. Which one of the	following electromagnetic radiation	has the least wavelength?			1

(A) Gamma rays
(C)	Visible light
(B) 
Microwaves
(D)	X-rays


6. In a Young's double-slit experiment, the screen is moved away from the plane of the slits. What will be its effect on the following ?	1
(i) Angular separation of the fringes.
(ii) Fringe-width.
(A) Both (i) and (ii) remain constant.
(B) (i) remains constant, but (ii) decreases.
(C) (i) remains constant, but (ii) increases.
(D) Both (i) and (ii) increase.


7. The	energy of a photon of wavelength A is	1
(A) he 11.	(B)	hc/11.
(C)	11./hc	(D)	11.h/c
8. The	ratio of the  nuclear densities of two nuclei having mass numbers 64
and 125 is	1

64
(A) 125
5
(C) 4

4
(B) 5

(D) 1


9. During the formation of a p-n junction:	1
(A) diffusion current keeps increasing.
(B) drift current remains constant.
(C) both the diffusion current and drift current remain constant.
(D) diffusion current remains almost constant but drift current increases till both currents become equal.
10. The diagram shows four energy level of an	electron in Bohr model of hydrogen atom. Identify the transition in which the emitted photon will
have the highest energy.	1



(A) I
(C)	III









(B) II
(D)	IV

11. Which of the	following graphs correctly represents the variation of a particle momentum with its associated de-Broglie wavelength?	1
(A)	(B)



(C)	(D)


12. The capacitors, each of 4 µF are	to be connected in such a way that the effective capacitance of the	combination is 6 µF. This can be achieved by connecting			1
(A) All three in parallel
(B) All three in series
(C) Two of them connected in series and the combination in parallel to the third.
(D) Two of them connected in parallel and the combination in series to the third.

13. Which of the following statements about a series LCR circuit connected to
an ac source is correct ?	1
(A) If	the	frequency of the	source is increased, the impedance of the circuit first decreases and then increases.
(B) If	the	net	reactance (XL -	Xe) of circuit becomes equal to its resistance, then the current leads the voltage by 45°.
(C) At resonance, the voltage drop across the inductor is more than that
across the capacitor.
(D) At resonance, the voltage drop across the capacitor is more than that across the inductor.

14. According to Huygens principle, the amplitude of secondary wavelets is	1
(A) equal in both the forward and the backward directions.
(B) maxim um	in	the	forward	direction	and	zero in	the	backward direction.
(C) large in the forward direction and small in the backward direction.
(D) small in the forward direction and large in the backward direction.

15. The radius of the nth orbit in Bohr model of hydrogen atom is proportional
to	1

(A) n2

(C)	n

1
(B) n2
1
(D) n


Note: In question number 16 to 18 two statements are given - one labelled Assertion (A) and the other labelled Reason (R). Select the correct answer to these questions from the codes (a), (b), (c) and (d) as given below:
(A) Both Assertion (A) and	Reason (R) are	true and (R) 1s the correct explanation of (A).
(B) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and (R) is NOT the correct explanation of (A).
(C) Assertion (A) is true and Reason (R) is false.
(D) Assertion (A) is false and Reason (R) is also false.


16. Assertion (A) : The resistance of an  intrinsic semiconductor decreases with increase in its temperature.	1
Reason (R) : The number of conduction electrons as well as hole increase in an intrinsic semiconductor with rise in its temperature.
17. Assertion (A) : The equivalent resistance between points A and B in the given network is 2R.	1
Reason (R): All the resistors are connected in parallel



18. Assertion (A) : The deflecting torque acting on a current carrying loop is zero when its plane is perpendicular to the direction of magnetic
field.	1
Reason (R) : The deflecting torque acting on a loop of magnetic moment
irt in a magnetic field B is given by the dot product of irt and	B.

SECTION-B
19. Draw a graph showing the variation of potential energy of a pair of nucleons as a function of their separation. Indicate the region in which
the nuclear force is (a) attractive and (b) repulsive.	2
20. (a) How will the De Broglie wavelength associated with an electron be affected  when  the  (i) velocity of the  electron  decreases ? and
(ii) accelerating potential is increased? Justify your answer.	2
OR
(b) How would the stopping potential for a given photosensitive surface change if (i) the frequency of the incident radiation were increased ? and (ii) the intensity of incident radiation were decreased ? Justify
your answer.	2
21. Identify the electromagnetic wave whose wavelengths range is from about
(a) 10-12 m to about 10-8 m.
(b) 10-3 m to about 10-1 m.	2
Write one use of each.
22. Depict the orientation of an electric dipole in (a) stable and (b) unstable equilibrium in an external uniform electric field.
Write the potential energy of the dipole in each case.	2
23. (a) Write the expression for the Lorentz force on a particle of charge q moving with a velocity v in a magnetic field B . When is the magnitude of this force maximum ? Show that no work is done by
this force on the particle during its motion from a point 11 topoint 12 .	2
OR
(b) A long straight wire AB carries a current I. A particle (mass m and charge q) moves with a velocity v, parallel to the wire, at a distance d from it as shown in the figure. Obtain the expression for the force
experienced by the particle and mention its directions.	2


24. The potential difference applied across a given conductor is doubled. How will this affect (i) the mobility of electrons and (ii) the current density in
the conductor? Justify your answers.	2
25. Two coils C1 and C2 are placed close to each other. The magnetic flux 2 linked with the coil C2 varies with the current 11 flowing in coil C1, as shown in the figure. Find	2

(i) the mutual inductance of the  arrangement, and

(ii) the rate of change of current ( :)that will induce an emf of 100 V in coil C2.

SECTION- C
26. (a)  A plane wave-front propagating in a medium of refractive index 'µ1' is incident on a plane surface making an angle of incidence (i). It enters into a medium of refractive index µ2 (µ2 > µ1).
Use	Huygen's	construction	of	secondary	wavelets	to trace	the retracted wave-front. Hence verify Snell's law of refraction.		3
OR
(b)	Using Huygen's construction, show how a plane wave 1s reflected
from a surface. Hence verify the law of reflection.	3

27. An alternating voltage of 220 V is applied across a device X. A current of
0.22 A flows in the circuit and it lags behind the applied voltage in phase by n/2 radian. When the same voltage is applied across another device Y, the current in the circuit remains the same and it is in phase with the
applied voltage.	3
(i) Name the devices X and Y and,
(ii) Calculate the current flowing in the circuit when the same voltage is applied across the series combination of X and Y.
28. State the basic principle behind the working of an ac generator. Briefly describe its  working and  obtain the  expression  for the  instantaneous value of emf induced.	3
29. (a)	Briefly	describe	how	the	current	sensitivity	of	a	moving	coil galvanometer can be increased.
(b)	A galvanometer shows full scale deflection for current lg. A resistance R1 is required to convert it into a voltmeter of range (0 - V) and  a
resistance R2 to convert it into a voltmeter of range (0 - 2V). Find the
resistance of the galvanometer.	3
30. (a)	(i)		Differentiate between 'distance of closest approach' and 'impact parameter'.
(ii) Determine the	distance of closest approach when an	alpha particle of kinetic energy 3.95 MeV approaches a nucleus of
Z = 79, stops and reverses its directions.	3
OR
(b)  (i)  State three postulates of Bohr's theory of hydrogen atom.
(ii) Find the angular momentum of an	electron revolving 1n the second orbit in Bohr's hydrogen atom.		3
SECTION-D
31. (a)	(i)		Explain how free electrons in a metal at constant temperature attain an average velocity under the action of an electric field. Hence obtain an expression for it.	3
(ii)  Consider two conducting wires A and B of the same diameter but made of different materials joined in series across a battery. The number density of electrons in A is 1.5 times that in B. Find the ratio of drift velocity of electrons in wire A to that in wire B.	2
OR

(b)	(i)	A cell emf of (E) and internal resistance (r) is connected across a variable load resistance (R). Draw plots showing the variation of terminal voltage V with (i) R and (ii) the current (I) in the load.	2
(ii) Three cells, each of emf E but internal resistances 2r, 3r and 6r are connected in parallel across a resistor R.
Obtain expressions for (i) current flowing in the circuit, and
(ii) the terminal potential difference across the equivalent cell.	3
32. (a)  Draw the circuit arrangement for studying V-1 characteristics of a p-n junction diode in (i) forward biasing and (ii) reverse biasing. Draw the typical V-1 characteristics of a silicon diode. Describe briefly the following terms : (i) minority carrier injection in forward
biasing and (ii) breakdown voltage in reverse biasing.	5
OR
(b) Name two important processes involved in the formation of a p-n junction diode. With the help of a circuit diagram, explain the working of junction diode as a full wave rectifier. Draw its input and output waveforms. State the characteristic property of a  junction
diode that makes it suitable for rectification.	5


33. (a) (i) Draw a ray diagram to show the working of a compound microscope. Obtain the expression for the total magnification for
the final image to be formed at the near point.	3
(ii) In a compound microscope an object is placed at a distance of 1.5 cm from the objective of focal length 1.25 cm. If the eye-piece has a focal length of 5 cm and the final image is formed at the near
point, find the magnifying power of the  microscope.	2
OR
(b) (i) Draw a ray diagram for the formation of image of an object by an astronomical telescope, 1n normal adjustment. Obtain the expression for its magnifying power.
(ii) The magnifying power of an astronomical telescope in normal adjustment 1s 2.9 and the objective and the eyepiece are separated by a distance of 150 cm. Find the focal lengths of the
two lenses.	5



SECTION-E
Note : Questions number 34 and 35 are Case Study based questions.
Read the following paragraph and answer the questions.
34. A lens is a transparent optical medium bounded by two surfaces; at least one of which should be spherical. Considering image formation by a single spherical surface successively at the two surfaces of a lens, lens maker's formula is obtained. It is useful to design lenses of desired focal length using surfaces of suitable radii of curvature. This formula helps us obtain a relation between u, v and f for a lens. Lenses form images of objects and they are used in a number of optical devices, for example microscopes and
telescopes.	4
(i) An object AB is kept in front of a composite convex lens, as shown in figure. Will the lens produce one image? If not, explain.

(ii) A real image of an object formed by a convex lens is observed on a screen. If the screen is removed, will the image still be formed ? Explain.
(iii) A double convex lens is made of glass of refractive index 1.55 with both faces of the same radius of curvature. Find the radius of curvature required if focal length is 20 cm.
OR
(iii) Two convex lenses A and B of focal lengths 15 cm and 10 cm respectively are placed coaxially 'd' distance apart. A point object is kept at a distance of 30 cm in front of lens A. Find the value of 'd' so that the rays emerging from lens B are parallel to its principal axis.

35. A capacitor is a system of two conductors separated by an insulator. The two conductors have equal and opposite charges with a potential difference between them. The capacitance of a capacitor depends on the geometrical configuration (shape, size and separation) of the system and also on the nature of the insulator separating the two conductors. They are used to store charges. Like resistors, capacitors can be arranged in series or parallel or a combination of both to obtain desired value of
capacitance.	4


(i) Find the equivalent capacitance between points A and Bin the given diagram.

(ii) A dielectric slab is inserted between the plates of a parallel plate capacitor. The electric field between the plates decreases. Explain.
(iii) A capacitor A of capacitance C, having charge Q is connected across another uncharged capacitor B of capacitance 2C. Find an expression for (a) the potential difference across the combination and (b) the charge lost by capacitor A.
OR
(iii) Two slabs of dielectric constants 2K and K fill the space between the plates of a parallel plate capacitor of plate area A and plate separation d as shown in figure. Find an expression for capacitance of the system.

























